---
layout: post
title:  "Test Post"
date:   2021-09-12 10:08:57 -0400
categories: C++
---

Recently I found out something amazing: providing template definitions in source files. The main drawback
of this strategy is that you have to explicitly instantiate templates so the linker can find the symbols.

Traditionally, you would also provide the template definition in the header file; this is the more robust
and preferred way of doing things. That way when you include the header file, the compiler can see the
definition and create new functions automatically.<\br>
This has a couple of disadvantages, the most obvious one being increase compilation times. But,
realistically this shouldn't be much of a problem.

If the main disadvantage of templates isn't much of a disadvantage, what is the point of providing template
definitions in the source file? My personal reason for doing this is that it reduces clutter in the header
file. While this seems like a trivial reason, I suspect my aversion to putting definitions in header files
is probably from some long forgotten horrible memory of trying to figure out a linker error when I started
out learning C++.<\br>
Admittedly, manually instantiating template functions does seem a little silly. But manually instantiating
template functions is required if you would like the functions to be exported as symbols in a shared library.
This happens to match my use case exactly so it's not much of a drawback (for me at least).

So how does it work? In the header file you would only specify the declaration of the template function.
Compiling a source file that includes this header file should succeed, and at link time the linker will
try to look for the definition of the template function. This is where errors can start to occur.<\br>
Say for example the template declaration looks like this: `template<typename T> T myfunction()`. If you
try to use it like so: `int myint = myfunction<int>()` without providing a definition for
`template<> int myfunction()`, the linker will complain to you about it. Therefore you would have to
manually instantiate the function for each possible use case. This can become very cumbersome for complex
templates. Again, this drawback isn't something that affects me greatly. Personally, I am not a big fan of
templates and I try to avoid them as much as possible.

## Example:

{% highlight cpp %}
// dll.h
#pragma once

// msvc specific, dllimport required to import static member variables
#ifdef DLL_EXPORT
#define DLL_API __declspec(dllexport)
#else
#define DLL_API __declspec(dllimport)
#endif

class DLL_API dlltest
{
public:
    dlltest();
    ~dlltest();

    template<typename T>
    T ComponentCreate();

    static int Value;
private:
    int m_Member;
};

template<typename T>
T MyTemplateFunction(T foo);

// dll.cpp
#include "dll.h"

int dlltest::Value = 0;

dlltest::dlltest()
    : m_Member(6)
{
   Value++;
}

dlltest::~dlltest()
{
    Value--;
}

template<>
int dlltest::ComponentCreate()
{
    return m_Member;
}

template<>
float dlltest::ComponentCreate()
{
    m_Member++;
    return (float)m_Member;
}

template<>
int MyTemplateFunction(int foo)
{
    return foo + 2;
}

//main.cpp
#include "dll.h"

#include <stdio.h>

template<>
double dlltest::ComponentCreate()
{
    double mydouble = (double)dlltest::Value;
    return mydouble;
}

int main()
{
    dlltest test;
    dlltest test2;
    int myint = test.ComponentCreate<int>();
    float myfloat = test.ComponentCreate<float>();
    double mydouble = test.ComponentCreate<double>();

    int myint2 = MyTemplateFunction<int>(4);

    printf("%d, %f, %f, %d\n", myint, myfloat, mydouble, myint2);
}
{% endhighlight %}

The cmake file I wrote for this example looks like this:

```
cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.10)

project(dlltest)

set(EXE_NAME main)

add_library(${PROJECT_NAME} SHARED dll.h dll.cpp)
set_target_properties(${PROJECT_NAME} PROPERTIES WINDOWS_EXPORT_ALL_SYMBOLS TRUE)
target_compile_definitions(${PROJECT_NAME} PRIVATE DLL_EXPORT)

add_executable(${EXE_NAME} main.cpp)
target_link_libraries(${EXE_NAME} PRIVATE ${PROJECT_NAME})
```

I've only ever tested this code with MSVC, so I have no clue if it also works with GCC and Clang.
From the example, you can see that this also works with member functions. You can also provide
specializations of a template function across compile units.
